I want to talk to you about the future
of
medicine before I do that I want to talk
a little bit about the
past now throughout much of the recent
history of medicine we've thought about
illness and treatment in terms of a
profoundly profoundly simple model in
fact the model is so simple that you
could summarize it in six words have
disease take pill kill
something now the reason for the
dominance of this model is of course the
antibiotic Revolution many of you might
not know this but we happen to be
celebrating the 100th year of the
introduction of the antibiotics into the
United States but what you do know is
that that introduction was nothing short
of
transformative here you had a chemical
either from the natural world or
artificially synthesized in the
laboratory and it would course through
your
body it would find its Target lock into
its Target a microb or some part of a
microb and then turn off a lock and a
key with exquisite depthness exquisite
specificity and you would end up taking
a previously fatal lethal disease and
pneumonia syphilis tuberculosis and
transforming that into a curable or
treatable
illness you have a pneumonia you take
penicillin you kill the microb and you
cure the
disease so seductive was this idea so
potent the metaphor of lock in key and
killing something that it really swept
through biology it was a transformation
like no
other and we've really spent the last
100 years trying to replicate that model
over and over again in non-infectious
diseases and chronic diseases like
diabetes and hypertension and heart
disease and it's worked but it's only
worked partly let me show you you know
if you take the entire universe of all
chemical reactions in the human body
Every chemical reaction that's that your
body is capable of most people think
that that number is on the order of a
million let's call it a million and now
you ask the question what number or
fraction of reactions can actually be
targeted by the entire pharmacopia all
of Medicinal Chemistry that number is
250 the rest is chemical darkness in
other words
0.025% of all chemical reactions in your
body are actually targetable by this
lock and key
mechanism you know if you think about
human physiology as a vast Global
telephone network with interacting nodes
and interacting pieces then all of our
Medicinal Chemistry is operating on one
tiny corner at the edge the outer edge
of that Network it's like all of our
pharmaceutical chemistry is a pole
operat in witcha Kansas who's tinkering
with about 10 or 15 telephone
lines so so what do we do about this
idea what if we reorganized this
approach in fact it turns out that the
natural world gives us a sense of how
one might think about illness in a
radically different way rather than
disease medicine
Target in fact the natural world is
organized hierarchically upwards not
downwards but upwards and we begin with
a self-regulating semi-autonomous unit
called a
cell these self-regulating
semi-autonomous units gives rise to
self-regulating semi-autonomous units
called organs and these organs coales to
form things called
humans and these organisms ultimately
live in environments which are partly
self-regulating and and partly
semi-autonomous what's nice about this
scheme this hierarchical scheme building
upwards rather than downwards is that it
allows us to think about illness as well
in a somewhat different
way take a disease like
cancer since the 1950s we've tried
rather desperately to apply this lock
and key model to cancer we've tried to
kill cells using a variety of
chemotherapies or targeted therapies and
as most of us know that's worked it's
worked for diseases like leukemia it's
worked for some forms of breast cancer
but eventually we've run to the ceiling
of that approach and it's only in the
last 10 years or so that we've begun to
think about using the immune system
remembering that in fact the cancer cell
doesn't grow in a vacuum it actually
grows in a human organism and could you
use the organismal capacity the fact
that human beings have an immune system
to attack cancers in fact
led to some of the most spectacular new
medicines in
cancer and finally I mean there's the
level of the environment isn't there you
know we don't think of cancer as sort of
altering the environment let me give you
an example of a profoundly carcinogenic
environment it's called a
prison you take loneliness you take
depression you take confinement and you
add to that rolled up in a little white
sheet of paper one of the most potent
neuros stimulants that we know called
nicotine and you add to that one of the
most potent addictive substances that
you know and you have a procarcinogenic
environment but you can have
anti-carcinogenic environments too there
are attempts to create meu to change the
hormonal milu for breast cancer for
instance we're trying to change the
metabolic meu for other forms of cancer
or take another disease like depression
again working upwards since the 1960s
and 1970s we've tried again desperately
to turn off molecules that operate
between nerve cells serotonin dopamine
and tried to cure depression that way
and that's worked but then that's
leashed to
limit and we now know that what you
really probably need to do is to change
the physiology of the organ the brain
rewire it remodel it and that of course
we know study upon study has shown that
talk therapy does exactly that and study
upon study has shown that talk therapy
comound
with medicines pills really is much more
effective than either one alone and can
we imagine a more immersive environment
that will change depression can you lock
out the signals that elicit depression
again moving
upwards along this sort of hierarchical
chain of organization what's really at
stake perhaps here is not the medicine
itself but a metaphor rather than
killing something in the case of the
Great chronic degenerative diseases
kidney failure diabetes hypertension
osteoarthritis maybe what we really need
to do is change the metaphor to Growing
something and that's the key perhaps to
reframing our thinking about medicine
now this
idea of changing of creating a
perceptual shift as it were came home to
me to roost in a very very personal
manner about 10 years ago about 10 years
ago I've been a runner most of my life I
went for a run one Saturday morning run
I came back and woke up and I basically
couldn't move my right knee was swollen
up and you could hear that sort of
ominous crunch of bone against
bone and one of the uh one of the perks
of being a physician is that you get to
order your own
MRIs and I had an MRI the next week and
it looked like that essentially the
meniscus of cartilage that is between
bone had been completely torn and the
bone itself had been shattered now if
you're looking at me and feeling sorry
let me tell you a few facts if I was to
take an MRI of every person in this
audience 60% of you would show signs of
bone degeneration and cartilage
degeneration like this 85% of all women
by the age of 70 would show moderate to
severe cartilage degeneration 50 to 60%
of the men in this audience would also
have such signs so this is a a very
common disease well the second perk of
being a physician is that you can get to
experiment on your old ailments so about
10 years ago we began we brought this
process into the laboratory and we began
to do simple experiments mechanically
trying to fix this degeneration we tried
to inject chemicals into the uh knee
spaces of animals to try to reverse uh
cartilage degeneration and to put a
short summary on a very long and painful
process essentially it came to not
nothing happened and then about 7 years
ago we had a research student from
Australia now the nice thing about
Australians is that they're habitually
used to looking at the world upside down
and so Dan Dan suggested to me you know
maybe it isn't a mechanical problem
maybe it isn't a chemical problem maybe
it's a stem cell
problem in other words he had two two
hypotheses number one there is such a
thing as a skeletal stem cell a skeletal
stem cell that builds up the entire
vertebrate skeleton bone cartilage and
the fibrous elements of skeleton just
like there's a stem cell in blood just
like there's a stem cell in the nervous
system and two that maybe that the
degeneration or the dysfunction of this
stem cell is causing osteochondral
arthritis a very common ailment so
really the question was you know were we
looking for a pill when we should have
really been looking for a cell so we
switched our models and now we began to
look for skeletal stem cells and to cut
again a long story short about 5 years
ago we found these
cells they live inside the skeleton
here's a schematic and then a real
photograph of one of them the white
stuff is bone and and these red columns
that you see and the yellow cells are
cells that have Arisen from one single
skeletal stem cell Columns of cartilage
Columns of bone coming out of a single
cell these cells are fascinating they
have four properties number one is that
they live where they're expected to live
they live just underneath the surface of
the bone underneath cartilage you know
in biology it's location location
location and they move into the
appropriate areas and form bone and
cartilage that's one here's an
interesting property you can take them
out of the vertebrate skeleton you can
culture them in pachy dishes in the
laboratory and they are dying to form
cartilage you remember we couldn't form
cartilage For Love or Money these cells
are dying to form cartilage they form
their own furls of cartilage around
themselves they are also number three
the most efficient repairers of
fractures that we've ever encountered
this is a little bone a mouse bone that
we fractured and then let it heal by
itself these stem cells have come in and
repaired in yellow the bone and white
the cartilage almost completely so much
so that if you label them with a
fluorescent diey you can see them like
some kind of peculiar cellular glue
coming into the area of a fracture
fixing it locally and then stopping
their work now the fourth one is the
most ominous and that is that their
numbers decline precipitously
precipitously 10-fold 50-fold as you
age and So what had happened really is
that we found ourselves in a perceptual
shift we we had gone hunting for pills
but we ended up finding theories and in
some ways we had hooked ourselves back
on to this idea cells organisms
environments because we were now
thinking about bone stem Cil we were
thinking about arthritis in terms of a
cellular disease and then the next
question was are there organs can you
build this as an organ outside the body
can you implant cartilage into areas of
trauma and perhaps most interestingly
can you ascend right up and create
environments you know we know that
exercise remodels bone but come on none
of us is going to exercise so could you
imagine ways of passively loading and
unloading bone so that you can recreate
or regenerate degenerating cartilage and
perhaps more interestingly more
importantly the question is can you
apply this model more globally outside
medicine what's at stake as I said
before is not killing something but
growing something and it raises a series
of I think some of the most interesting
questions about how we think about
medicine in the
future could your medicine be a cell and
not a pill how would we grow these cells
what would we do to stop the malignant
growth of these cells we heard about the
problems of unleashing growth could we
we have to implant suicide genes into
these cells to stop them from growing
could your medicine be an organ that's
created outside the body and then
implanted into the body could that stop
some of the degeneration what if that
organ needed to have memory in cases of
of diseases of of the nervous system
some of those organs have memory how
could we implant those memories back in
could we store these organs would each
organ have to be developed for an
individual human being and put
back and perhaps most puzzlingly could
your medicine be an
environment could you patent an
environment you know there's been in
every culture shamans have been using
environments as medicines could we
imagine that for our
future I've talked a lot about models I
began this talk with models so let me
end with some thoughts about model
building it's what we do as scientists
you know when an
architect builds a model he or she is
trying to show you a world in miniature
when a scientist is building a model he
or she is trying to show you the world
in metaphor
he or she's trying to create a way new
way of seeing the former is a scale
shift and the latter is a perceptual
shift now
antibiotics created such a perceptual
shift in our way of thinking about
medicine that we it really colored
distorted very successfully the way
we've thought about medicine for the
last 100 years but we need new models to
think about medicine in the future
that's what's at stake
you know there's a popular Trope out
there that the reason we haven't had the
transformative impact on the treatment
of illness is because we don't have
powerful enough drugs and that's partly
true but perhaps the real reason is that
we don't have powerful enough ways of
thinking about
medicines it's certainly true that it
would be lovely to have new medicines
but perhaps what's really at stake are
three more intangible M mechanisms
models metaphors thank
you so I I I mean I really like this
metaphor how how does it Link in there's
a lot of talk um in technology land
about the personalization of medicine
that we have all this data and that
Medical Treatments of the future will be
for you specifically your genome your
your current context do does that apply
to this model you've got here it's a
very interesting question you know we've
thought about personalization of
medicine very much in terms of genomics
that's because the gene is such a
dominant metaphor again to use that same
word in medicine today that we think of
you know the genome will drive the
personalization of medicine but of
course the genome is just the bottom of
of a long chain of being as it were um
that chain of being really the first
organized unit of that is the cell so if
we are really going to deliver medicine
in this way we have to think of
personalizing cellular therapies and
then personalizing organ or organismal
therapies and ultimately personalizing
immersion therapies for for for the
environment so so I think at every stage
you know they say that there's that
metaphor you know that Turtles all the
way well in this there's there's
personalization all the way so so when
you say um medicine could be a cell and
not a pill I mean you're talking about
potentially your own cells yeah
absolutely so so converted to stem cells
perhaps tested against all kinds of
drugs or something and uh un prepared
and there's no perhaps this is what
we're doing this is what's happening and
in fact we're slowly moving not away
from genomics but incorporating genomics
into what would be called multi-order
semi-autonomous self-regulating systems
like cells like organs like environments
thank you so much
[Applause]